---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/400-social-studies/410-ap-human-geography/unit-3/3-1-creating-culture/","updated":"2024-04-18T12:55:07.055-05:00"}
---

2023-11-02  
20:13
Status: #SocialStudies/APHG/note 

Tags: [[400 Social Studies/410 AP Human Geography/AP Human Geography\|AP Human Geography]]
# Culture Traits
Culture traits are **singular behaviors, beliefs, or values that are common to a culture.
- Wearing **green is a *cultural trait* of the V.R. Eaton HS culture**, because it is a school color.
- Eating **breakfast tacos is a *cultural trait* of North Texas**.
- Wearing **a kimono or other traditional clothing to a festival is a Japanese *cultural trait***.
---
# Creating a [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Cultural Landscape\|Cultural Landscape]]
[[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Cultural Landscape\|Cultural Landscape]] is the **evidence of human activity across a natural, physical landscape**. It is created by our *cultural traits*.
- "Old Town" differences in building styles over time
---
# Culture is more than what you have
Roughly 1 in 5 people are employed in the coffee industry in Kenya. And yet, Kenyans have only begun drinking coffee recently, and it's still seen as a high-status, wealthy and "global" activity, not a part of Kenyan culture.

---
# Diffusion of Culture
## [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Relocation Diffusion\|Relocation Diffusion]]
- The United States has experienced [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Relocation Diffusion\|Relocation Diffusion]] through the spread of Mexican cuisine such as the taco. This is because the taco was brought over to the United States by Mexican immigrants throughout the history of the US.
## [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Contagious Diffusion\|Contagious Diffusion]]
- The US has experienced [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Contagious Diffusion\|Contagious Diffusion]] through the rise of the popularity of the video game **Among Us**[^1], which became popular through social media. As more streamers played it, friends learned of it from each other and more and more people tried it.
## [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Reverse Hierarchical Diffusion\|Reverse Hierarchical Diffusion]]
- The US has experienced [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Reverse Hierarchical Diffusion\|reverse hierarchical diffusion]] through the increasing popularity of tattoos. Tattoos used to be prominent among members of society seen as 'rough' or dangerous, such as sailors, soldiers, or even prisoners. They became more popular and accepted as works of body art as more people began to get them.|
## [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Stimulus Diffusion\|Stimulus Diffusion]]
- The US has experienced [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 3/Stimulus Diffusion\|stimulus diffusion]] through the common image of the Cola Cola Santa Claus, who is adapted from many early version of Saint Nicholas and other figures that combined together to create a unique symbol associated with one brand of drink.
## Barriers to Diffusion
- The US experiences barriers to diffusion with many countries. For example, it is not as common for trends and memes from the Middle East to be adopted in the United States due to political difficulties between the two areas, and a lack of a shared language.
## Effects of Diffusion
- The US has changed due to cultural diffusion from Mexico. Many Spanish words or phrases have become part of common usage (queso, amigo, fiesta, adios), and Catholicism is more common now thanks to Mexican [[Flashcards/Social Studies/APHG/Unit 2/Immigration\|Immigration]] as well.
---