---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/200-science/210-biology/unit-1-1-cell-structure-and-function-and-viruses/1-1-8-cells-specialization/","updated":"2024-02-28T15:33:29.775-06:00"}
---

2023-12-11  
09:35
Status: #Science/Biology/note #incomplete 
Links: [[200 Science/210 Biology/Biology\|Biology]]
# [[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.2 - Biomolecules/Deoxyribonucleic Acid\|Deoxyribonucleic Acid]]
[[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.2 - Biomolecules/Deoxyribonucleic Acid\|Deoxyribonucleic Acid]], short for **==[[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.2 - Biomolecules/Deoxyribonucleic Acid\|Deoxyribonucleic Acid]]==**, holds all the ==genetic information== that determines an organisms ==traits==. Within the ==structure== of **DNA is the information for ==life==**—the complete instructions for manufacturing all the ==[[Flashcards/Science/Biology/Proteins\|Proteins]]== for an organism.
## Structure
- [[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.2 - Biomolecules/Deoxyribonucleic Acid\|Deoxyribonucleic Acid]] in [[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.1 - Cell Structure & Function, and Viruses/1.1.5 - Prokaryotes vs. Eukaryotes#Eukaryotes\|eukaryotic cells]] is typically ==linear== and shaped like a ==twisted ladder== celled a double helix.
- **The [[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.2 - Biomolecules/Deoxyribonucleic Acid\|Deoxyribonucleic Acid]] of all known organisms consists of the same basic components called *nucleotides***
- **The sequence of the nucleotides determines everything** from the type of organism to the types of cells composing the organism.
# Cell Specialization
Although nearly every [[Cell\|Cell]] in a multicellular organism contains all of the [[200 Science/210 Biology/Unit 1.2 - Biomolecules/Deoxyribonucleic Acid\|Deoxyribonucleic Acid]] of that organism, not all of the genes are expressed in each cell. **Only the genes specific to each type of [[Cell\|Cell]] are expressed** causing the cells to become specialized. This allows the organism to maintain homeostasis due to every cell performing its specific function.
- Ex.
	- **Erythrocytes**: red blood cells that carry [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]] throughout the body
	- **Cheek Cells**: squamous cells protect the inside of the mouth
	- **Sperm Cells**: male gametes (sex cells) that are used to produce offspring 
	- **Memory Cells**: immune cells that “store” the information of previously encountered pathogens