---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/300-health-science/310-principles-of-health-science/unit-8-clinical-skills-circulatory-respiratory-nervous-system/8-1-the-circulatory-system/","updated":"2024-03-21T09:13:18.188-05:00"}
---

2024-01-29  
13:42
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[300 Health Science/310 Principles of Health Science/Principles of Health Science\|Principles of Health Science]]
# [[Circulatory System\|Circulatory System]]
[[Temperature\|Temperature]] (T), [[pulse\|pulse]] (P), [[respiratory rate\|respiratory rate]] (RR), and [[blood pressure\|blood pressure]] (BP) measurements are considered vital signs because they measure some of the body's vital functions and provide necessary information about the patient's physical well-being.

---
>[!tip]- 
>Vital signs are indicators of the body's ability to maintain homeostasis. 

---
## Introduction to the [[Circulatory System\|Circulatory System]]
**Circulation is the continuous one-way movement of blood throughout the body.** ==All the systems and organs depend on the circulatory system.== **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/artery\|Arteries]] carry blood with [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]] and nutrients to each [[Cell\|Cell]],** *and veins carry away the [[Cell\|cell’s]] [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/waste products\|waste products]].* If the circulation is not enough, [[Cell\|cells]] die. When the [[Cell\|cells]] die, tissues begin to die, and the organs stop working properly.
### Types of Blood Vessels
- **[[Arteries\|Arteries]]** carry blood away from the [[Heart\|Heart]] to all parts of the body. [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/artery\|Arteries]] carry [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/oxygenated\|oxygenated]] blood, except for the [[pulmonary artery\|pulmonary artery]]. The pulmonary [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/artery\|artery]] carries [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/deoxygenated\|deoxygenated]] blood.  
- **[[Arterioles\|Arterioles]]** are small [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/artery\|arteries]] that connect [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/artery\|arteries]] with capillaries.  
- **[[Capillaries\|Capillaries]]** have very thin walls that allow nutrients, [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]], and [[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Carbon Dioxide\|Carbon Dioxide]] to move in and out of the blood.
- **[[Venules\|Venules]]** are small veins that connect veins with capillaries. 
- **[[Veins\|Veins]]** carry blood from all the different parts of the body and return it to the [[Heart\|Heart]]. Veins carry [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/deoxygenated\|deoxygenated]] blood, with the exception of the [[pulmonary vein\|pulmonary vein]]. The [[pulmonary vein\|pulmonary vein]] carries [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/oxygenated\|oxygenated]] blood. Veins have valves that keep the blood from to the [[Heart\|Heart]].
	- “Nice and Skinny”