---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/300-health-science/310-principles-of-health-science/unit-8-clinical-skills-circulatory-respiratory-nervous-system/8-2-the-respiratory-system/","updated":"2024-03-25T13:35:58.217-05:00"}
---

2024-02-05  
13:13
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[300 Health Science/310 Principles of Health Science/Principles of Health Science\|Principles of Health Science]]
# Introduction to the [[Respiratory System\|Respiratory System]]
Respiration is breathing. Breathing is necessary to supply life-giving [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]] to each cell in the body and to remove the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/waste products\|waste products]] of each cell. The cell's gaseous waste product is called [[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Carbon Dioxide\|Carbon Dioxide]]. [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]] enters the body when air is pulled in through the mouth and nose. This process is called [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/inspiration-inhalation\|inspiration/inhalation]]. [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/expiration-exhalation\|Expiration/exhalation]] occurs when the body forces air out of the [[Lungs\|Lungs]]. This is the body’s way of eliminating the cells’ gaseous waste ([[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Carbon Dioxide\|Carbon Dioxide]]).
# Structures of the [[Respiratory System\|Respiratory System]]
The [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/nasal cavity\|nasal cavity]] ([[nose\|nose]]) is where air enters the body. The [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/nasal cavity\|nasal cavity]] is the preferred passage for air to enter the body. The nasal lining helps stop dust particles and pathogens. If dust and pathogens enter the [[Lungs\|Lungs]], the chance for infection is increased.

Paranasal sinuses are mucus-lined cavities in the bones of the face, connected by passageways to the nose, which help to warm and moisten inhaled air. When drainage from the sinuses is blocked, as after a cold, they can become infected (a condition called sinusitis).
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/oral cavity\|Oral cavity]] (mouth) is where air enters the body when the nasal passage is blocked or when a person breathes through the mouth.
- [[Pharynx\|Pharynx]] (throat) is the passageway that air enters after leaving the [[nose\|nose]] and [[mouth\|mouth]]. 
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/epiglottis\|Epiglottis]] is a flap that closes when food or [[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Dihydrogen Oxide\|water]] is swallowed. When it closes, it covers the opening of the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/trachea\|trachea]] that leads to the [[Lungs\|Lungs]]. This prevents food and [[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Dihydrogen Oxide\|water]] from entering the [[lungs\|lungs]].
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/larynx\|Larynx]] (voice box) is located just below the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/epiglottis\|epiglottis]]. It is a pouch containing a cordlike framework that creates voice sounds.
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/trachea\|Trachea]] (windpipe) is the passageway between the [[Pharynx\|pharynx]] and [[Lungs\|Lungs]].
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/bronchi\|Bronchi]] are air passageways that connect to the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/trachea\|trachea]].The [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/trachea\|trachea]] divides into two main branches, the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/bronchial tubes\|bronchial tubes]] that lead into the right and left [[Lungs\|Lungs]].
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/bronchial tubes\|Bronchial tubes]] are lined with hairlike objects called [[Flashcards/Science/Biology/Cilia\|cilia]]. The [[Flashcards/Science/Biology/Cilia\|cilia]] help move mucus, which catches dust and pathogens, up and out of the [[Lungs\|Lungs]].
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/bronchioles\|Bronchioles]] are the smallest subdivisions of the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/bronchi\|bronchi]].
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/alveoli\|Alveoli]] (air sacs) are at the end of each [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/bronchioles\|bronchiole]]. Thee [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/alveoli\|alveoli]] are covered with capillaries that absorb [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]] into the blood. [[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Carbon Dioxide\|Carbon Dioxide]] is forced out of the blood into the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/alveoli\|alveoli]] ([[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Carbon Dioxide\|Carbon Dioxide]] and [[Periodic Table of Elements/Oxygen\|Oxygen]] exchange). Once the [[Periodic Table of Elements/And Compounds/Carbon Dioxide\|Carbon Dioxide]] has been released into the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/alveoli\|alveoli]], it can be exhaled from the body.
- [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/diaphragm\|Diaphragm]] is the muscular wall that divides the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity. To begin [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/inspiration-inhalation\|inspiration]], the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/diaphragm\|diaphragm]] moves down, creating a vacuum that pulls air into the [[Lungs\|Lungs]]. When the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/diaphragm\|diaphragm]] relaxes and moves upward again, air is exhaled (forced out) from the [[Lungs\|Lungs]].