---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/300-health-science/310-principles-of-health-science/unit-8-clinical-skills-circulatory-respiratory-nervous-system/8-3-the-nervous-system/","updated":"2024-04-12T13:18:18.203-05:00"}
---

2024-03-20  
13:13
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[300 Health Science/310 Principles of Health Science/Principles of Health Science\|Principles of Health Science]]
# Introduction to the [[Nervous System\|Nervous System]]
Another major human body system whose malfunction can result in the need for intensive care is the nervous system. The nervous system is a delicate system of [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/neuron\|nerve cells]] (or [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/neuron\|neurons]]) linked together to receive [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|stimuli]] and to respond to [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|stimuli]]. [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|Stimuli]] are anything that cause a reaction or response (e.g., when your hand touches a hot object or when something flies into your eye). Response is the reaction to the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|stimuli]] (e.g., moving your hand when it touches something hot or tears in the eye when something flies into it). The nervous system is divided into two parts: the **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/central nervous system\|central nervous system]]** and the **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/peripheral nervous system\|peripheral nervous system]]**.

The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/central nervous system\|central nervous system]] (CNS)** includes the brain and the spinal cord. Nerves of the spinal cord carry messages to and from the brain. The brain has three main parts:  
- The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/cerebrum\|cerebrum]]** processes thought having to do with memory and learning. It controls voluntary movements and sense interpretation.  
- The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/cerebellum\|cerebellum]]** coordinates muscle activity and balance so that muscles function smoothly.  
- The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/medulla\|medulla]]**, a part of the brainstem, controls breathing, heartbeat, circulatory action, and digestive movements.  

The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/peripheral nervous system\|peripheral nervous system]]** **(PNS)** includes the nerves and [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/ganglia\|ganglia]] outside the brain and spinal cord. ere are:  
- 12 pairs of cranial nerves  
- 31 pairs of spinal nerves 
- Various nerve branches in body organs

All parts of the central and [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/peripheral nervous system\|peripheral nervous systems]] work together to relay messages to the brain. Each message is carried to the correct area of the brain by its specialized [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/neuron\|neuron]] or [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/neuron\|nerve cell]].

Each specialized [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/neuron\|neuron]] leads into a passage that delivers the message or [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|stimuli]] to the brain or the spinal cord. The areas in the spinal cord that can receive messages cause an action or response to [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|stimuli]] that does not require interpretation.The [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/stimuli\|stimuli]] that are received by the brain are interpreted and cause a response.

This response can occur anyplace in the body but is most easily recognized in the sense organs. For example, sound waves are received by the **[[Ears\|Ears]]**; light rays are received by the **[[Eyes\|Eyes]]**; the **[[nose\|nose]]** and **[[tongue\|tongue]]** respond to smell and taste; and the nerve endings throughout the body respond to pressure, heat, cold, pain, and touch. The following are the sensory organs of the body.

## The [[Eyes\|Eyes]] 
The eye provides vision. It is a ball-shaped organ located in the eye orbit of the skull
### **Protection for the Eye**  
- The lids and eyelashes aid in protecting the eye. 
- The tears from the [[lacrimal duct\|lacrimal duct]] help wash away foreign matter.
### **Parts of the Eye**  
- The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/sclera\|sclera]]**, or the white of the eye, is the outer lining.
- The front portion of the [[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/sclera\|sclera]] is clear and is called the cornea, or the “window of the eye.” 
- The **[[choroid\|choroid]]**, the second coating, is heavily pigmented to keep light rays from scattering 
- The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/retina\|retina]]**, the innermost coating of the eye, houses the mechanisms that sense vision.- The **[[Flashcards/Health Science/PHS/optic nerve\|optic nerve]]**, located at the back of the eye, receives a picture and sends it to the brain for interpretation.
## The [[Ears\|Ear]]
The ear provides hearing and equilibrium. The ear can be divided into three main parts: 
1. The **external ear** includes the following: 
	- **[[Auricle\|Auricle]]**, or outside projection 
	- **[[External auditory canal\|External auditory canal]]** 
	- **[[Tympanic Membrane\|Tympanic membrane]]** or [[Tympanic membrane\|eardrum]], which separates the external and middle ear  
2. The **[[middle ear\|middle ear]]** is an air space that contains three bones or [[ossicles\|ossicles]]. These bones amplify sound waves received by the [[tympanic membrane\|tympanic membrane]]. 
3. The **[[inner ear\|inner ear]]** contains the semicircular canals, which transmit sound waves received from the [[middle ear\|middle ear]] to the nerves that allow us to translate sound. The [[inner ear\|inner ear]] is also responsible for equilibrium.

